An influential body of work from the early days of cyberculture
studies that continues to prove relevant today is typified by Brenda
Danet’s 1995 essay, “Text as Mask: Gender, Play and Performance on the
Internet,” a work fascinated with the fact that the Web seems designed
for infinite play with identity (Danet 1998). Particularly in the
period when the Web was primarily a word medium, no one on the other
end of a digital encounter necessarily knew who you were or what you
looked like. Danet found that close to 80 percent of Web users she
surveyed admitted to pretending to be a different gender, race or
sexual orientation than they were in “real life.” This number is no
doubt inflated by the fact that at the time of her survey the
Intertubes were largely populated by adventurous early adopters of an
avant-garde and countercultural bent. In any event, this notion of an
anonymous space open to identity play was soon taken up by advertisers
who famously began to talk about the Web as a place beyond race, class
and gender (as if the virtual world had fully replaced the real
one). Almost immediately the misleading nature of that claim was
parodied in a famous cartoon in the New Yorker from 1993 featuring a
dog at a keyboard, telling a canine pal, “On the Internet, nobody
knows you’re a dog” (Steiner 1993). Soon there was a whole industry of
further parodies: “On the Internet nobody knows you’re _____” (“a
space alien,” “a cat,” “a pickle”; you name it).
